Hello, I’m Luc Semeria from the
GPU software team at Apple.
In this video,
I’m going to introduce you to Metal for
the Apple M1 chip and show how you
can make your Metal applications
shine on the new Apple silicon Macs.
First, we will dive into the features
that Apple M1 supports
for Metal apps on the Mac.
And we will cover some of the key
improvements we’ve made to increase
graphics and compute performance for
Pro applications and Metal games.
Then, we will highlight a few key
Metal features that you may now
leverage in your applications to take
full advantage of the Apple M1 GPU.
Apple M1 is engineered to bring
incredible performance and a whole new
set of features to the Mac product line.
And Metal gives you access to
the GPU at the heart of Apple M1.
We have unified the Metal features of
iOS and macOS to seamlessly support
modern Mac applications and tap into
the power of our Apple-designed GPU.
And to take it even further,
we’ve made key improvements to
improve responsiveness and increase
graphics and compute performance for
Pro applications and Metal games.
In Metal, we’ve been exposing two
distinct sets of GPU families:
one on iOS,
targeting our latest iPhones and iPads
and leveraging our Apple-designed GPUs,
one on macOS for our latest Intel Macs,
where the features and capabilities
available may differ between the
power-efficient integrated GPU and
the high-performance discrete GPU.
Apple M1 supports the full set of
Metal features from iOS and macOS.
This means all the features found
on a high-end discrete GPU are now
available on our most portable Macs.
So, if you are making apps
targeting the A14 on iOS,
you will find those same
advanced features on Apple M1.
Likewise, if you are a Mac developer,
all Metal features,
including features only
found on discrete GPUs,
now work seamlessly and with great
performance on Apple silicon Macs.
In your codebase,
support family queries will return true
for both Apple 7 and Mac 2 on Apple M1.
Let’s dive into the features.
It all starts with full support
for the GPU-driven pipeline.
This includes Tier 2 indirect argument
buffers with support for nested argument
buffers and up to half a million
textures and a thousand samplers.
It also includes support for indirect
command buffers for both render
and compute commands to reduce
CPU overhead and allow command reuse.
It even supports encoding indirect
commands directly on the GPU to fully
maximize CPU-to-GPU parallelization.
Apple M1 also supports barycentric
coordinates and pre-clipped primitive ID,
which enables different
rendering techniques such as
visibility buffer rendering.
MSAA arrays and MSAA layered rendering
for shadow maps and multi-viewport
rendering are fully supported,
including F32 MSAA Resolve.
As you would expect,
Apple M1 supports raster order
groups to precisely control the
memory access from fragment shaders
for order-independent transparency,
multilayer Gbuffers, and voxelization.
It also supports ray tracing and function
pointers that we introduced at DCLS WWDC.
On the texturing side,
Apple M1 supports sparse
textures with access counters
for the first time on a Mac.
This is perfect for texture
streaming on a GPU timeline.
We’ll cover this in more details later.
BC127 highly compressed texture
formats are fully supported.
Your existing game asset pipeline can
use them without any modification.
Apple M1 supports 32-bit
floating-point filtering,
including bilinear and anisotropic.
It also supports advanced texture clamp
modes such as clamp-to-border colors:
black, white, or transparent.
On the compute side,
Apple M1 supports all SIMD group
reduction and permutation functions.
Additional SIMD matrix multiply functions
are also available in the Metal shading
language to further optimize your machine
learning and image processing algorithms.
Next, let’s talk about GPU performance.
With Apple M1,
we have taken our expertise
in designing best-in-class,
power-efficient GPUs and
applied it to the Mac.
We are relying on our TBDR and unified
memory architecture to provide great
performance with minimum power.
In the process,
we are providing even better
performance for Metal apps while
providing an industry-leading level
of UI and multi-app responsiveness.
The Apple M1 GPU uses our new generation
of Apple-designed shader cores and
scales it further for the needs of pro
applications and games running on macOS.
For starters, Apple M1 has faster F32
floating-point operations.
These are common for image processing,
machine learning, ray tracing, and games.
Apple M1 also provides better
thread group memory performance
in compute and tile shaders.
It also increases ALU utilization
using improved instruction
scheduling across SIMD groups.
Finally, to account for more
complex shaders on the Mac,
the shader core also speeds up
function calls and stack accesses.
Performance on
Metal features is also great.
If your application already
makes use of our GPU-driven
graphics pipeline features,
you will see significantly
improved performance on Apple M1.
We have also made FP16 texture
filtering significantly faster
for better support of HDR content.
FP32 and INT32 texture
image reads are also faster.
And to keep memory bandwidth to a
minimum without loss of precision,
the Apple M1 GPU leverages our latest
compression hardware to bring even more
bandwidth savings to your applications.
Finally,
performance improvements are also visible
in terms of application responsiveness.
Apple M1 supports multiple concurrent
compute workloads running in parallel
with geometry and fragment processing.
It also supports fast context
switching for great UI responsiveness.
And scheduling on the GPU has also been
tuned to handle multiple applications
running concurrently or applications
with multiple Metal command queues.
Putting this together,
Apple M1 supports all Metal features
to seamlessly run modern
Mac applications with great
performance and responsiveness.
Now, let’s see some of this in action.
We worked with our partners at Larian
Studios to bring their upcoming title,
Baldur's Gate 3, to the Apple M1.
And here it is.
This scene is running with ultra
settings in 1080p resolution.
It’s using a number of advanced
rendering techniques including PBR,
cascaded shadow maps,
temporal anti-aliasing,
and several post-processing effects
such as SSCO and depth of field.
Like in this cutscene.
Before Apple M1,
this had only been possible
on Macs with discrete GPUs.
Diving in further,
Larion uses our unified memory
architecture to speed up sharing
buffers between CPU and GPU.
They have also been taking advantage
of parallelization on the GPU for mesh
surface generation and shadow passes.
Performance is further improved
using lossless compression
and FP16 math in shaders.
So that’s a quick look
at Baldur's Gate 3,
and we think you will love
playing it on Apple silicon Macs.
As we just saw,
Apple silicon Macs with Apple M1 can
seamlessly run your applications,
supporting all of our most advanced
Metal features with great performance.
As we’ve been developing Apple M1,
we’ve been looking at a wide range
of Mac applications and have been
considering how they could be optimized
even further in terms of performance,
memory bandwidth, and memory footprint.
We found a few key features that
you may use when optimizing for
Apple silicon Macs and would
like to tell you more about them.
These features are tile shaders,
memoryless render targets,
programmable blending,
and sparse textures with
GPU access counters.
First, let’s explore how you may
leverage tile shading to
greatly reduce memory bandwidth.
But before we dive into tile shading,
let’s quickly recap how the TBDR or
Tile-based Deferred Renderer
architecture of modern Apple GPUs works.
This will help understand what tile
shading is and why you should use it.
Our TBDR architecture
has two main phases:
vertex processing, where geometries are
processed; fragment processing,
where pixels are processed.
Let’s focus on the fragment stage,
which is where tile
shading is introduced.
Fragment processing operates
on really fast on-chip memory.
On-chip depth and stencil memory is
used for efficient hidden-surface
removal to shade only visible pixels.
On-chip tile memory is used for
fragment shaders for reading
and writing color values.
But it doesn’t stop there.
How good would it be if you could
dispatch a compute-like shader
that could access all of the
pixels in your tile memory and
that could be inserted right in the
middle of your fragment processing?
Well,
this is exactly what a tile shader is.
It lets you interleave fragment
and compute work in the same render
path and save a significant amount
of memory bandwidth in the process.
Mixing compute and render passes has
become more common in recent years.
But in some cases,
this can consume a large amount of
memory bandwidth because the tile
memory must be stored and reloaded
from system memory between passes.
Instead, you can use tile shading on
Apple silicon GPUs to mix render
and compute in a single pass,
saving memory bandwidth.
Results between fragment draw
calls and tile shading dispatches
are fully consistent due to the
implicit synchronization and
barriers introduced by Metal.
Note that in this case,
there is no repeated load store
between system memory and tile memory.
This saves a huge amount of memory
bandwidth and can greatly improve
the performance of your application.
Let’s see this in action
on a real use case.
A typical example is
tile-based light culling,
which is a rendering technique where
the render target is split into
small tiles and a light culling
compute shader builds a list of
all lights that affect each tile.
The final lighting path uses the
per-tile light list to shade only
the lights affecting a given tile.
This reduces the shading
cost dramatically,
especially if you have a lot
of spotlights in your scene.
As you can see, both render and compute
encoders are used.
Let’s see how tile shading can help
rendering this in a single pass.
Using tile shading,
you can generate per-tile light lists in
the middle of a render command encoder.
Note that there is no
break in your render path.
All the computation is done in one pass,
keeping all necessary data on tile
memory without going to system memory.
And since most of the intermediate
data stays in tile memory,
you could use memoryless render targets
to also reduce the memory footprint,
but more on that later.
To summarize,
tile shading is the new shading stage
only possible on Apple TBDR GPUs.
Tile shading has full
access to tile memory,
thread group memory,
as well as device memory.
Synchronization between fragment draw
calls and tile shading dispatches is
guaranteed by Metal and results are fully
consistent due to implicit barriers.
We encourage you to check in
your renderer if you are mixing
compute and fragment processing.
If you do,
you may consider using tile shading
instead of separate compute passes.
This will save memory bandwidth and
bring in more performance to your app.
Now,
let’s take a look at memoryless render
targets to understand how you can
use them to reduce memory footprint.
Memoryless render targets are render
targets not backed by system memory.
They are only backed
by on-chip tile memory.
They are created using
Metal storage mode memoryless.
This is typically used for
attachments that do not need to be
stored at the end of a render pass.
Let’s see some use cases.
The first use case is with MSAA textures.
Here, we have a large 4x MSAA texture
as well as a resolved texture.
At the end of the pass,
both the MSAA and the resolved
textures are stored in system memory.
By using the Metal Resolve Store action,
we can save all the bandwidth required
to store the large MSAA texture.
This is because MSAA resolve
always happens from tile memory,
so there is no point
storing the MSAA samples.
This makes the unresolved
multi-sample texture fully transient.
We never load it or store it.
So in that case,
we can just make it memoryless and save
all the footprints of the MSAA texture.
For the next use case,
let’s take a look at memoryless
for depth and stencil textures.
Depth attachments are
required for depth testing,
but in some cases,
the depth texture does not need to
be stored back to system memory.
This means that you should
be able to reduce both memory
bandwidth and footprint together.
Using Metal Store Action Don’t Care,
we can save the memory bandwidth
used to store the depth texture,
while depth testing is still happening
correctly on the on-chip depth memory.
On top of that,
since we don’t need to read or write
the depth texture in system memory,
we can mark it as memoryless
and save its memory footprint.
Finally, let’s go back to our previous
tile deferred rendering
algorithm with tile shading.
We have three passes: G-buffer rendering,
light calling, and light accumulation.
Note that most of the
intermediate attachments are
only accessed in tile memory.
This means that these attachments don’t
need to be stored back to system memory.
Again,
we can use don't care stall action with
memoryless storage modes to save memory
bandwidth as well as memory footprint.
In summary,
memoryless render targets are a
great way to reduce the memory
footprint of your application.
You can typically use them
with MSAA attachments,
Depth and Stencil attachments, and,
more generally,
with any temporary attachments
fully produced and consumed
in the same render path.
Let’s explore another unique
TBDR feature that we think can
provide tremendous performance
benefits and is really easy to use:
programmable blending.
Programmable blending allows
fragment shaders to access pixel
data directly from tile memory.
This means that a fragment shader can
read the output of the previous fragment
shader for the same pixel position.
Programmable blending allows
you to merge multiple render
passes into a single pass,
drastically reducing your
memory bandwidth in the process.
Let’s look at a simple example.
Here,
we have a classic example of deferred
shading ported from Intel-based Macs.
The G-Buffer attachments are rendered
and stored to system memory by
the first render command encoder.
The attachments are read back
immediately afterwards in
the per-pixel lighting path,
consuming significant memory bandwidth.
If you only need to read the output
of the previous fragment shader
at the current pixel position,
then you should really
use programmable blending.
It allows you to fold the two
render passes in a single pass,
avoiding extra load
stalls to system memory.
And now, your render target
attachments are intermediate,
though they can be marked as memoryless
to save extra memory footprint on top
of the memory bandwidth you already
saved with programmable blending.
We encourage you to inspect your
code and check if some fragment
shaders are reading the pixel values
from previous fragment shaders.
Programmable blending
is very easy to use.
Once you know the
fragment shader to modify,
just add the color attachment
in your fragment shader
inputs and read back the data.
This allows more complex effects
in your app with massively
reduced memory bandwidth.
We just covered a few techniques
that leverage Apple silicon's
TBDR GPU architecture to reduce
memory bandwidth and footprint.
Now, let's talk about sparse textures,
another key feature that is available
for the first time on macOS.
Sparse textures with texture
streaming can reduce the memory
footprint of your application while
maintaining the quality of your render.
Before diving into sparse textures,
let’s do a quick recap on
what texture streaming is.
Texture streaming lets you render
incredibly large scenes with a
fixed memory budget by streaming
in only the texture mipmap
needed for the current view.
The lowest levels of the mipmap
pyramid are kept resident in
case higher-quality mipmap is
requested but not yet streamed in.
Let’s see how Metal's sparse
textures improve this approach.
First,
sparse textures provide texture access
counters that tell you how often each
region of a sparse texture is accessed.
This lets you prioritize texture loading,
as regions that are accessed
more often are generally more
visible in the current view.
Residency can be managed at
a sparse tile granularity
instead of MIP map granularity.
Taken together,
sparse textures let you stream
more visible details within
the same memory footprint,
improving quality,
or it lets you stream the same amount
of details with a smaller footprint.
Let’s see how to use sparse textures.
A renderer using sparse textures
can be split into four stages.
First, initialization,
where the sparse heap and
sparse textures are created.
Then, render,
where the scene is rendered by
sampling the sparse textures.
After rendering,
you query the texture access counters,
which tells you how often sparse
tiles are being used for your scene.
Finally, you stream your textures,
where you can map and load new
content into sparse tiles and
unmap tiles to save memory.
Let’s now dive into each stage.
First, you need to create a sparse heap
of a fixed size and allocate one
or more sparse textures from it.
Note that you only need
to bind the sparse heap.
This heap defines your memory
budget and is where sparse
tiles are actually stored.
Sampling textiles from the sparse
textures will automatically read
the content from the sparse heap.
As part of initialization,
you also load the lowest MIP levels
of your texture as sample fallbacks.
Here is how to create a sparse heap
with a given memory size using Metal.
You first calculate the size of your heap
as a multiple of the sparse tile size.
You then generate the
sparse heap descriptor.
You set its type to sparse
and specify its size.
Then you create the sparse
heap from the descriptor.
Once the sparse heap is created,
you just need to create
a texture from it.
First,
create a texture descriptor as usual.
Then, create the sparse texture
using the sparse heap object
and the texture descriptor.
After creating the sparse texture,
you would typically also
map its lowest MIP levels.
We will see an example
of texture mapping later.
After the initialization stage,
you can start your rendering
loop by rendering the scene.
This render will sample
your sparse textures.
Here is a fragment shader that does this.
You start by sampling your sparse
texture using the sparse sample method
which returns a sparse color object.
You can then call the resident method
on the return object to determine if
the texture region you are trying to
sample is mapped in memory or not.
If it is,
you simply return the color value.
Otherwise,
you take the fallback path and sample
the sparse texture with a traditional
sample command and an LOD clamp.
After rendering,
it is time to query the access
counters to get a sense of which
sparse tiles are being accessed
the most in the current view.
This is how you collect the
texture access counters in Metal.
You start by creating a buffer
to store the access counters.
Then you encode a bleed command to
copy the counters into your buffer,
specifying the sparse texture, MIP level,
slice, and region you are interested in.
Once you know which sparse
tiles are the most visible based
on the access counter values,
you can then stream in
your texture content.
To do this, you map the sparse tiles that
are being used and load the
texture content into these tiles.
At this stage,
you can also unmap the tiles that are not
as visible to save memory in your heap.
Here is how you can map and
unmap sparse tiles using Metal.
First, you create a Metal resource
state command encoder.
Then, you can simply encode
map and unmap operations.
You specify the regions, slices,
and MIP levels of the
texture to map or unmap.
Once regions are mapped,
you can then bleed or create your
texture data onto the mapped memory.
Let’s see this rendering loop
in action on a simple example.
First, the sparse heap and the
sparse texture are created.
As part of the initialization,
the sparse tiles corresponding to
the two lowest MIP map levels of the
texture are mapped into the sparse heap.
Their content is loaded
using bleed commands.
Both mapping and bleed commands
happen on a GPU timeline.
At this point,
the memory budget is far from being used.
Quality will be refined after each
subsequent rendering loop iteration.
After the first render,
the access counters are queried,
and based on the counter values,
additional tiles are mapped and loaded.
As the scene changes
in subsequent render,
the access counters are getting updated.
Based on the new values,
sparse tiles that are not
visible anymore can be unmapped,
and the associated memory can be
used to stream in new sparse tiles
corresponding to the new visible regions.
This is how you can continuously
add new details to your scene
under a fixed memory budget.
Let’s now look at a
real example in action.
In this demo,
you can see our modern rendering bistro
scene presented as a split screen.
On the left, the scene is rendered using
traditional texture streaming,
while on the right,
sparse texture streaming is being used.
And at the bottom,
we’re tracking the texture memory
footprint for the full-screen render.
As you can see,
texture streaming with sparse textures
uses less than half of the memory
footprint of traditional texture
streaming with at least the same quality.
Take a look at the menu.
The quality is even better.
With sparse textures,
we only map and load the
tiles that are accessed.
And with the texture access counters,
we have an accurate view of the
texture regions that are visible.
On top of that,
sparse texture streaming is done on a
GPU timeline with great performance.
So that's sparse textures.
To conclude, with Apple M1,
we are unifying our iOS and macOS
Metal features and bringing this
support to the Mac platform.
Apple M1 brings all of the high-end
graphics and compute features that
you would expect from a discrete
GPU to our most portable Macs,
and it does it with a
great level of performance.
It also brings key features such as tile
shading and sparse textures that you may
now use in your Mac applications to take
full advantage of the Apple silicon GPU.
As a next step,
you can learn more about the
Metal features we discussed here by
looking at our previous Tech Talks and
WWDC sessions by clicking the videos
link on developer.apple.com/metal.
We have talks covering optimization
for Apple silicon and the A-series GPU,
deeper dive into Metal features such
as ray tracing and GPU-driven pipeline,
and a whole lot more.
Be sure to check it out.
Thank you for watching.